pkgs/README: Document security expectations for new packages (#405187)
NixOS/nixpkgs: pkgs/README.md

* Does the project have a clear license statement? Remember that software is unfree by default (all rights reserved), and merely providing access to the source code does not imply its redistribution. In case of doubt, ask upstream.
* How realistic is it that it will be used by other people? It's good that nixpkgs caters to various niches, but if it's a niche of 5 people it's probably too small. A good estimate is checking upstream issues and pull requests, or other software repositories.
* Is the software maintained upstream? Especially security-critical components should see regular maintenance.
* Are you willing to maintain the package? You should care enough about the package to be willing to keep it up and running for at least one complete Nixpkgs' release life-cycle.
  * In case you are not able to maintain the package you wrote, you can seek someone to fill that role, effectively adopting the package.

If any of these questions' answer is no, then you should probably not add the package.

Special care has to be taken with security-critical software components.

> * Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is not fit for nixpkgs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is unlikely to be fit for nixpkgs
```

We should still mark `knownVulnerabilities` that only concern exotic use cases as long as we cannot easily auto-block those usecases. For example, `curl-impersonate` is basically only useful for HTTPS fetching from Cloudflare, so unpatched e.g. SMB issues are not relevant to the real usecase, but ideally should also be marked, but do not mean the package is not useful to have while those issues are technically there.

Author: Fair! This is the feedback i am looking for. Olm comes to mind too, with the known vuln yet being commonly used

* Any package depending on a known-vulnerable library should be considered carefully.

> * Web engines like chromium and gecko receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.
> * (Web-)Services working on untrusted input should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Packages typically used with untrusted data received over the network should have a maintained upstream responsive to issue. For example:
  * Web engines like chromium and gecko receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.
  * (Web-)Services working on untrusted input should have a maintained and responsible upstream.
```

Author: I'll do "untrusted data ~~received over the network~~ should", i see little reason to restrict this to network things. Though in practice most untrusted data is network stuff, not everything is.

Reviewer: Yeah, I switched to «e.g.» myself a minute later. I do think that any network data needs a justification of trustworthiness, so an «e.g.» is a good thing unless we have a wide-ish category which is just as bad. I mean, rich enough implementations PDF & DOC(X) & XLS(X) & video containers probably _are_ as bad, but there are few examples who even try.

Author: We already have `For example:` at the end of the line. Imo it makes more sense to just add a bullet point for archive unpackers (a common source of untrusted input) to have a non-network example and call it a day

Reviewer: I just think that non-browser network clients are sometimes horrible in their own way.

* Applications in the unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained/responsible upstream.

> * Encryption libraries should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer: Any ideas how to word that most of the time we want some kind of known-competent upstream for such things?

Author: "known-competent" is a difficult consideration. I wrote "responsible" and considered "reasonable due diligence", but getting this concise yet precise is hard. My intention is not to outright ban niche upstream devs. I'd already be happy if upstream has available communication channels to disclose (security) issues and then acts on them.

Author: I pushed an attempt to specify this a bit more, hope this helps

* Is the package ready for general use? We don't want to include projects that are too immature or are going to be abandoned immediately. In case of doubt, check with upstream.
* Does the project have a clear license statement? Remember that software is unfree by default (all rights reserved), and merely providing access to the source code does not imply its redistribution. In case of doubt, ask upstream.
* How realistic is it that it will be used by other people? It's good that nixpkgs caters to various niches, but if it's a niche of 5 people it's probably too small. A good estimate is checking upstream issues and pull requests, or other software repositories.

> * Is the software maintained upstream? Especially security-critical components should see regular maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Is the software maintained upstream? Things at high risk of breakage, in security or dependency compatibility or data integrity sense, should see regular maintenance.
```

I know the PR is about security, but the question added is not just about security (and unsafe even without attackers is no better!)

* Are you willing to maintain the package? You should care enough about the package to be willing to keep it up and running for at least one complete Nixpkgs' release life-cycle.
  * In case you are not able to maintain the package you wrote, you can seek someone to fill that role, effectively adopting the package.

If any of these questions' answer is no, then you should probably not add the package.

Special care has to be taken with security-critical software components.
* Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is unlikely to be fit for nixpkgs
* Any package depending on a known-vulnerable library should be considered carefully.
* Packages typically used with untrusted data should have a maintained and responsible upstream. For example:

>   * Web engines like chromium and gecko receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Web engines like Chromium or Gecko receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.
```

>   * Web-Services working on untrusted input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Typically publicly exposed web-services working on untrusted input
```

* Is the software maintained upstream? Especially packages that are security-critical, rely on fast-moving dependencies or could endanger data integrity should see regular maintenance.
* Are you willing to maintain the package? You should care enough about the package to be willing to keep it up and running for at least one complete Nixpkgs' release life-cycle.
  * In case you are not able to maintain the package you wrote, you can seek someone to fill that role, effectively adopting the package.

If any of these questions' answer is no, then you should probably not add the package.

Special care has to be taken with security-critical software components.
* Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is unlikely to be fit for nixpkgs.
* Any package depending on a known-vulnerable library should be considered carefully.
* Packages typically used with untrusted data should have a maintained and responsible upstream. For example:

>   * Web engines like Blink, Gecko or Webkit receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.

Author: I intended to *specifically* list browsers and their forks, because somehow people never want to listen when someone says the supercalifragilistic browser is vulnerable.

>   * Web engines like Blink, Gecko or Webkit receive frequent updates. Any package which does not keep up-to-date web engines should be considered vulnerable.

Reviewer 3: I assume you're referring to Zen browser here. The thing is, to my knowledge, it _does_ keep up-to-date with Firefox in its development branch. The issue is that it doesn't make new releases quickly enough when Firefox announces a new version with fixed vulns. Additionally, it's not just the web engines: if you look through https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/known-vulnerabilities/firefox/, very few appear to be gecko bugs.

>   * Typically publicly exposed web-services working on untrusted input

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Publicly exposed services (such as HTTP servers) work with untrusted input
```

  * Archives or rich documents commonly shared by email should be considered as potentially untrusted input, which should be considered for any package working with such files.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer: A lack of a module doesn't make it hard for the user to mark something SUID, so if there is a recommended-SUID binary with high risks and low expectation of fixes, it's a problem in any case.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer 3: > A lack of a module doesn't make it hard for the user to mark something SUID,

I thought it wasn't possible to chmod in the nix store?

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Author: It currently is possible to have suid binaries in the store, though that requires either removing the `ro` bind mount or mounting the store in a different system. See also https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/406184 for proposed `nosuid` on the store mount.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer 4: as that PR notes, there *should* never be a suid binary in the store:

> No suid binaries or devices should ever be in the nix store. If they are, something is seriously wrong.

but regardless of whether the binary itself is actually suid on-disk or if it's handled via `security.wrappers`, there is still an elevated risk of security vulnerabilities.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer 4: as that PR notes, there *should* never be a suid binary in the store:

> No suid binaries or devices should ever be in the nix store. If they are, something is seriously wrong.

but regardless of whether the binary itself is actually suid on-disk or if it's handled via `security.wrappers`, there is still an elevated risk of security vulnerabilities.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/DBUS-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer 3: Upon further reflection, I have decided it doesn't really matter if the binaries are suid or not. If they're intended to be suid / require suid, they require a module and this applies anyway.

* Encryption libraries should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

> * Especially security-critical components that are part of larger packages should be unvendored (=use the nix package as dependency, instead of vendored and pinned sources).

Reviewer 5: And replace `nix` with `nixpkgs` please.

> * Especially security-critical components that are part of larger packages should be unvendored (=use the nix package as dependency, instead of vendored and pinned sources).

Author: > I don't think packages need to be "especially" security-critical for this to be a requirement.

True! What i wanted to communicate was: We might want to unvendor things that are not directly security-critical, but security-critical components in particular should be unvendored. Will have a think about better wording.

* A "responsible upstream" includes various aspects, such as:
  * channels to disclose security concerns
  * being responsive to security concerns, providing fixes or workarounds

>   * transparent public discolsure of security issues when they are found or fixed

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * transparent public disclosure of security issues when they are found or fixed
```

  * These aspects are sometimes hard to verify, in which case an upstream that is not known to be irresponsible should be considered as responsible.

> * Free software should be built from source where possible. Relying on vendored binary blobs can have devastating effects on security.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Free software should be built from source where possible. Relying on vendored binary blobs introduces the risk of supply chain attacks.
```

Reviewer: Practically speaking, for every supply chain attack attempt there are hordes of forgotten vulnerable old vendored versions of network-exposed libraries.

Reviewer 3: Fair.

```suggestion
* Source-available software should be built from source where possible. Relying on vendored binary blobs introduces the risk of supply chain attacks and vulnerable outdated dependencies.
```

Also, switched to source-available as it's probably more correct.

If any of these questions' answer is no, then you should probably not add the package.

Special care has to be taken with security-critical software components. Because entries in the Nix store are inert and do nothing by themselves, packages should be considered by their intended use, e.g. when used together with a NixOS module.

* Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is unlikely to be fit for nixpkgs.
* Any package depending on a known-vulnerable library should be considered carefully.
* Packages typically used with untrusted data should have a maintained and responsible upstream. For example:
  * Any package which does not follow upstream security policies should be considered vulnerable. In particular, packages that vendor or fork web engines like Blink, Gecko or Webkit need to keep up with the frequent updates of those projects.
  * Services which typically work on web traffic are working on untrusted input.
  * Data (such as archives or rich documents) commonly shared over untrusted channels (e.g. email) is untrusted.

> * Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/D-Bus-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM/D-Bus modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.
```
Nit

Author: If anything:
```suggestion
* Applications in the Unix authentication stack such as PAM-/D-Bus-modules or SUID binaries should be considered carefully, and should have a maintained and responsible upstream.
```

Reviewer 3: No? PAM-modules and D-Bus-modules are not compound words, and therefore, there should not be a hyphen. While hyphens are typically used for compound adjectives (e.g. well-maintained), here PAM and D-Bus are being used as noun adjuncts and therefore should NOT be hyphenated.

Author: alright alright i yield

  * In case you are not able to maintain the package you wrote, you can seek someone to fill that role, effectively adopting the package.

If any of these questions' answer is no, then you should probably not add the package.

Special care has to be taken with security-critical software components. Because entries in the Nix store are inert and do nothing by themselves, packages should be considered by their intended use, e.g. when used together with a NixOS module.

* Any package that immediately would need to be tagged with `meta.knownVulnerabilities` is unlikely to be fit for nixpkgs.
* Any package depending on a known-vulnerable library should be considered carefully.
* Packages typically used with untrusted data should have a maintained and responsible upstream. For example:
  * Any package which does not follow upstream security policies should be considered vulnerable. In particular, packages that vendor or fork web engines like Blink, Gecko or Webkit need to keep up with the frequent updates of those projects.

>   * Any security-critical fast-moving package such as Chrome or Firefox (forks) should have at least one active committer among the maintainers. This encures no critical fixes are delayed unnecessarily, endangering unsuspecting users.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Any security-critical fast-moving package such as Chrome or Firefox (or their forks) should have at least one active committer among the maintainers. This ensures no critical fixes are delayed unnecessarily, endangering unsuspecting users.
```

>   * Any security-critical fast-moving package such as Chrome or Firefox (or their forks) should have at least one active committer among the maintainers. This ensures no critical fixes are delayed unnecessarily, endangering unsuspecting users.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * Any security-critical fast-moving package such as Chrome or Firefox (or their forks) must have at least one active committer among the maintainers. This ensures no critical fixes are delayed unnecessarily, endangering unsuspecting users.
```

"should" does not "ensure" anything.

Author: Alright alright *fine*, you win. Hard gatekeep criteria don't quite sit right with me, but if we can shut down all the questionable browsers then by all means... Done.
